[MUSIC]
Now that you have Node.js
on your computer,
you're obviously wanting to
immediately start using it.
So, in this exercise,
we will start using Node.
We will set up a packaged,
or adjacent, file for
our Git test folder that we
have been working with so far.
Then, we will setup a node module
called as lite server that
will serve up the contents
of our get test folder.
And then we can browse
this index.html file and
other files in a browser.
And we will also see how
the lite server will enable us to
automatically see updates to our browser
window as we make changes to our
index.html file, or
any other files in our get test folder.
The lite server is something that we're
going to extensively use in this and
future courses,
to be able to see the changes in real time
in a browser window as you edit
the files of your project.
As I mentioned,
we want to set up the package.json file.
So what exactly is this package.json
file that we're going to setup?
So here, I have some information from
the npmjs.org site
which specifies what exactly is
the role of the package.json file.
So the package.json file serves
as the documentation on what all
other packages that your
project is dependent upon.
So, for example, when you set up
the lite server of your project,
that will be recorded in
the package.json file.
And so that, subsequently, you can also
make use of that package in the future.
Also, it allows you to specify
which specific version of a package
that your project is dependent on.
So even if the package that you
depend on changes in the future,
you may insist that you want
the user to install only a specific
version of the package for
use within your node application.
And also,
it makes your builds reproducible,
which means that when you
share your code with others,
then they can also do installation
of all the node modules,
as we will see later in this exercise,
on their own computer.
So obviously your next question will be,
how do we create this package.json file?
If you are starting a new project where
you want to initialize the package.json
file, then simply type npm init at
the prompt in the project folder.
And then that will take you through
a set of steps which will enable you to
configure your package.json file.
So let's proceed with that for
our Git test project.
So here I am in the git-test
folder in my terminal window.
Make sure that you also open a terminal
window or a command window and
then go to the git-test folder.
And at the prompt, type npm init.
And then follow along
the questions that are asked.
So for the name of the project, we'll
just leave it as the default, git-test.
For version, we'll just leave it as 1.0.0.
We can edit that later.
For description,
this is a test directory
to learn Git and Node.
It doesn't matter,
type some description there.
And then the entry point,
I would just say index.html.
Usually if it is a node package,
the entry point will be index.js.
Now this folder that we have setup is
an index.html based folder, so
that's why I just typed in index.html.
Test command, nothing.
Git repository, if we had already setup
the git repository in the previous
exercise, it'll automatically
prompt that for you, if not,
this would be empty and give you an option
to type in the git repository URL,
in case you're using
an online git repository.
Some keywords for your project,
which I'm going to leave blank.
Author, type your name.
Let's be narcissistic.
And the license.
And then, it'll show you the configuration
of the package.json file in JSON format.
So if your family have a JSON,
does it look very, very familiar to you.
So if this looks all good,
let's just say OK and
then that results in the creation
of the package.json file.
So now if you list the folder contents,
you would see the package.json
file in the folder contents.
Open that Git test folder
in your favorite editor,
and then take a look at the contents
of package.json file in your editor.
As the next step, we will learn
how we can install a node module
using NPM, the Node Package Manager.
So, we're going to install this
node module called as light server.
The light server will serve up
the contents of this git-test folder in
a server that it starts up so that you
can view the contents in a browser.
Given that we have an index.html file,
if we serve up this folder,
then it'll be a website.
And you can view
the index.html in a browser.
So, let's set up the light server and
then we will see how we can make
use of the light server to serve
up the contents of this folder.
This is very, very useful because if
you're working on a web development
project, you want to see where live
version of your web development project.
So that,
as you make changes to your project,
you can see the changes immediately
reflected in the browser.
So this is a very good node package
that is very useful for this purpose.
So let's set up this light server.
To do that, add the prompt.
Type in NPM install.
So notice,
if you want NPM to install a node package,
this is how you're going to invoke it and
then you'd say lite-server.
And then, we also want to save the fact
that our project is using the lite server.
So we will save this information
in the package.json file.
So to do that,
you're going to type in -- save-dev.
Now the save-dev option specifies
that this lite server is used for
development dependency for our project.
If you are installing a node module on
which your project is directly dependent
on, then you would install it
by simply saying --save option.
So, let's go ahead and install it.
And you wait patiently for
the installation to take place.
It'll take all of a few minutes for
that to complete its installation.
Once that is installed,
then you would immediately
notice when you look at
the contents of your folder,
you will immediately notice that there is
a folder there created named node_modules.
Now, if you go into the node_module,
you will see a whole bunch
of other subfolders in there,
which contain node modules,
which are necessary for
the likes of our node module and so on.
So let's take a quick tour of
the node modules folder to see
what the contents of these are.
Going to my git-test folder, if you're
going to the node modules folder,
you would see, as I said,
a whole bunch of subfolders there.
Normally you don't need to be venturing
into the node modules folder.
They just exist there because they
are needed for the [INAUDIBLE].
So as you browse through, you should
notice a folder named lite-server here.
When you go into the lite-server folder,
note in particular the presence
of the index.js file and
then your package.json file and
several other things.
So this contents of the folder
comprises the lite-server node module.
But this lite-server node module
is dependent on other node modules
to provide it with some
additional functionality.
So that's the reason when you install the
light server node module, it'll in turn
install many other node modules, on which
the light server itself is dependent on.
So that's the reason why
you see that explosion of
this folders inside the node modules.
Don't be too concerned about it,
the sum total of folders will not be
more than a few tens of megabytes.
So it is not going to fill
up your directory with junk.
This is all essential for
node to be able to help you.
In case you're curious about the
lite-server and how it works and so on,
you can always go down to this GitHub
site where the lite-server is hosted.
And then look up the documentation for
lite-server.
I will introduce you to whatever you need
to know about lite-server as we go through
this course and the remaining courses.
So you don't need to worry too much about
it, but just in case you're curious,
you can always go to the site to find
out more details about lite-server.
The link is provided in your
exercise instructions and
additional resources
are part of this lesson.
Once you have completed that,
then head over to the.
Editor where you have the folder,
Git-Test folder, opened and
then view the contents of
the package.json file.
So you would see that the package.json
file contains exactly the information that
you configured with your NPM.
So you would see the name version and
repository author and
in particular, note this information here.
It says devDependencies, so
then it specifies the lite-sever,
and also notice it says hat 2.2.2.
So which means that this
particular project depends
upon lite-server that is a at
least version 2.2.2 or higher.
So this is very useful for us.
Now why do we need this information here?
Later on,
when you go to the other exercises,
you will notice that when you store
this on an online repository,
you don't want to be storing
everything in your node modules folder.
You will only be storing information
of all the files that we have created.
The node modules folder
can always be recreated by
typing NPM install at our command prompt.
And then based upon
the dev dependencies and
dependencies that are listed in
the packager file, all the node
modules that your project depends
on will automatically be installed.
We will see that later on how to use
NPM install in this course.
Now that we are at package.json file
let's make a couple of edits so
that we will be able to make use of
the lite-server to serve up that content.
So right here,
in this option called scripts,
let's add in one more here.
So we will say "start".
So start is a command that
NPM supports which enables
you to specify a bunch of
things that will be started.
So later on we will see
how we make use of this.
So here I'm going to say "npm run lite".
And after that test, I'm going to add
in one more entry called "lite",
which I will configure as "lite-server",
okay?
With these changes,
let's save the package.json file.
And then, now our project is configured,
so that now if you start the lite- server,
the contents of your folder will be now
served up in your favorite browser.
Heading back to our command prompt,
add the prompt.
If I type, npm start,
now you see why I put that
entry card start into
my package.JSON file.
If I say npm start, whatever the start is
configured as in the package.JSON file,
we specify that npm run light, and
the lite was specified as lite server.
So essentially,
we are saying Start the lite-server.
So, once I type npm start,
it will start the lite-server, and
it will serve up
the contents of this folder.
Now how do you access
the contents of this folder?
If you want to accesses this locally,
you will access it by specifying
the you are as localhost:3000.
These are the default settings for
the lite-server.
Furthermore, this should
automatically open
the browser window of
your default browser, and
show the contents of index or
HTML in the browser window.
Here you can see that I
have opened my editor and
my browser window directed
at localhost:3000
simultaneously side by side,
so that we can see
how the browser window
will immediately reflect
any changes that we make
to our Git test folder.
So let me go to index.html.
And then for the sake of space,
I'm going to turn that over.
And then, so here, you can see
that this is the contents of this.
And then, now,
let me add in one more paragraph.
And save the changes, and
then you will immediately notice that
the change that I made to my index.html
file is reflected into my browser.
This provides a very nice way
of being able to observe in real
time the changes that you make to your
code being reflected into your browser.
So when you are working on a project,
it'll be very appropriate for
you to be able to see
the changes immediately.
So when you make a change and
then save the file,
the modified code is immediately
loaded into your browser.
So you can immediately see the change
being reflected in your browser window.
This is a very useful tool while you
are doing development of your project.
That is the reason why I introduced
you to that lite-server, and
set it up so that we can make use of it,
as we develop the website in this course.
If you recall, we had already set up our
git-test folder to be a Git repository.
So Checking again, We
will see that we already have three
commits in our Git repository.
And this Git repository is already
mirrored to our online Git repository
which we have set up in the previous
exercise either at Bitbucket or GitHub.
My git-test folder is synced to my
Bitbucket repository in
this particular exercise.
So what I'm going to do now is to
show you how you can exclude some
folders from your project folder,
and then make sure that they are not
synchronized to your online repository.
Now as I said, the node_modules
folder can always be recreated
by typing npm install at the prompt.
So that's why when you upload
the contents of your folder
to an online Git repository,
or when you do a commit of
the folder to your Git repository,
you don't want the node_modules folder or
all the subfolders under it to be
included in the commit.
So how do we exclude some folders or
some files from our folder from being
checked in into our Git repository?
So to do that,
we will set up a file named .gitignore.
So that's the name of the file,
.gitignore.
So to create this .gitignore file,
we will go to our editor.
So in the editor, in the git-test folder,
I'm going to create a new file and
I will name it .gitignore.
Note that the name begins with a dot and
then, the rest of the name
is g-i-t-i-g-n-o-r-e.
So this is very very important that you
set up the file with exactly that name,
.gitignore.
So let's create this file
called .gitignore, and
the first line of that file,
we will type as node_modules.
So what this means is that
the node_modules folder is going to be
excluded from our git commit.
So once I create that .gitignore file and
then add node_modules into the .gitignore
file, let's save the changes.
And then we will now do a commit of
the current state of our project
into our Git repository.
I hope you remember your git commands.
Let's do a git status,
and then when you do that,
you will immediately notice
that you have the index.html
file marked as modified, and then the two
new files, .gitignore and package.json.
So, we do a git add .,
and then do a git status.
And then you see that all this new files
have been checked in into your commit.
Let's do a git commit.
git commit -m "fourth commit".
And the files are committed.
Let's push the new commit
to our online repository.
So, to do that git push -u
origin master and wait for
it to be pushed to our server.
Now, if you go to your
online Git repository,
you will see that
the package.json file and
.gitignore would have been checked
in into your Git repository.
Going to my Bitbucket repository
from the Git test, you will see that
when I look at the source, you will see
that the package.json file has been added.
The .gitignore has been added and the new
index.html file has been checked in.
So that completes this exercise.
So in this exercise,
we have learned how to set up
a package.json file using npm init.
We have learned how to
install an npm module.
And we have learned how to use
the lite-server npm module to serve up
the contents of our project folder so
that it can be viewed in a browser.
So, this is a nice way of
serving up your web contents,
your web application or your website, so
that you can see changes in real time
being reflected to your browser window.
And then we also saw how we can
setup the .gitignore so that some
folders can be excluded from being
checked into our Git repository.
This completes this exercise.
So with this,
I'm sure you have gotten a good handle on
the use of both Git, and
then also node and node modules.
Don't worry, we will be using node
extensively, in various ways,
as you go through the courses
of this specialization.
This is just a start.
[MUSIC]